######  1: Detachment sets us free

Anakin has a secret relationship in Padme, he builds an unhealthy attachment to her. The reason for this secrecy is tha romantic love is not permitted within the Jedi order, because it's a birthplace for strong attachments with all dangers that come from them. 

Anakin is unable to regulate this feelings for Padme and preventing his separation from her becomes his main focus. Wenn he suffers from visions about the future accompanied by a fear of loss, Yoda gently teaches him the dangers of attachment. "**Attachment leads to jealousy. The shadow of greed, that is.**" "**Train yourself to let go of everything you fear to lose.**"



###### 2: Equanimity is key, but not the end Goal

 Yoda says to Luke, "Adventure, Excitement. A Jedi craves not these things." Even though people may feel attracted to the Jedi lifestyle because of excitement and adventure; these are not the things a Jedi is after. 

> Adhering to a doctrine that favored the light side of the Force, the Jddi aspired to attain a state of inner tranquility through calmness and meditation while avoiding emotions affiliated with the dark side of the Force…such as anger and hatred. Nevertheless, Jedi philosophy did not forbid a Jedi from acting in self-defense or inthe defnse of others.

Reminds one of  a Stoic concept called 'eudaemonia': Even though inner tranquility is part of this, the goal is the pursuit of virtue. So the Jedi actually have a very Stoic mindset. 

In the movies, we can see this pursuit of equanimity often, by the mdeitation and mindfulness exercises that the Jedi engage in. This also protects them from the dark side , because being mindful means that we can more easily detect when problematic emotions start to creep upon us. 

###### 3: Fear leads us into darkness

Yoda: "**Fear is the path to the dark side. Fear leads to anger. Anger leads to hate. Hate leads to suffering.**"

Because of this fear of separation, Anakin also develops feelings of resentment towards everything that he perceives as threat. Yoda: "**In the end, cowards are those who follow the dark side.**" 

###### 4: Darkness will consume us

Now, it seems that many people are blind when it comes to the risks of  following the path of darkness. This path is seductive, easy, and often doesn't require much mental discipline. It's more attuned with our animalistic side, our passions and our will to dominate. It's undeniable that this path can lead to boundless pleasure, but there's also price to pay when we choose this directions. "Once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny, consume you it will." Yoda says. 

In Buddhism, there's are a concept called Samsara, which means the cycle of life and death, which is aprocess full of suffering. Pare of this suffering is desire, aversion and also ignorance. When we are constantly led by our cravings, our aversion, and operate in a state of ignorance, we will move to the lowest regions of samsara, also know as hell, in which we suffer deeply.

similarly, the Stoics have their definition of 'vice'. They divide it into foolishness, injustice, cowardice & intemperance, and following the path of vice leads to suffering. 

Anakin slowly turns more miserable during his pursuit of power. The tragic reality is that no matter how strong and powerful he becomes: he'll never have full control over his fate. We can see that he offers more and more of himself to reach an impossible goal, which only generates more suffering. When Padme dies, the Emperor tells Anakin that he killed her in his anger, which isn't entirly true. But this creates enormous grief, and also a form of 'toxic guilt' within Anakin which makes him even easier to control. 

So, darkness will not only harm ourselves but those around us as well. It will  lead to destruction, and this destruction will contribute to our suffering in return.

Stoics: "Keep our faculty in order."







